CN 379 external backup restore (#1)
hazelcast-guides/hazelcast-platform-operator-external-backup-restore: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/hazelcast-platform-operator-external-backup-restore.adoc

> = External Backup and Restore with Hazelcast

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Restore a Cluster from Cloud Storage with Hazelcast Platform Operator
```

The title should reflect the goal rather than the features we use.

:page-layout: tutorial
:page-product: operator
:page-categories: Cloud Native
:page-lang: go, java, node, python
:page-enterprise: true
:page-est-time: 20 mins

> :description: Migrate Hazelcast backup data to/from blob storages that cloud providers maintain, within Hazelcast cluster running in Kubernetes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:description: Learn how to back up data in Hazelcast maps to cloud storage and restore a new cluster, using that data.
```

{description}

== Context

> In this tutorial you will learn:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial you do the following:
```

Lead-in sentences should be complete.

> - Deploying Hazelcast with persistence enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Deploy Hazelcast with persistence enabled.
```

> - Creating persistence enabled map in the Hazelcast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create a Hazelcast map that has persistence enabled.
```

> - Backing data up from the map into the external storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Back up all map entries to external storage in the cloud.
```

> - Restarting the Hazelcast cluster with the restored data from the external storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Restart the Hazelcast cluster and restore the backup map entries from the cloud.
```

> There are two available options for Persistence feature of Hazelcast Platform Operator:

Reviewer: I think we can remove all the information below the list and link to our docs page about persistence in the Hazelcast Platform Operator docs.

- *Local* - backup the data to/from PVC.

- *External* - backup the data to/from external(blob) storages.

You'll see the *External* option of the Persistence feature.

== Before you Begin

Before starting this tutorial, make sure that you meet the following prerequisites:

* Up and running https://kubernetes.io/[Kubernetes] cluster
* Kubernetes command-line tool, https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl[kubectl]
* Deployed xref:operator:ROOT:index.adoc[Hazelcast Platform Operator]
* Created blob storage and access credentials in one of the cloud providers: https://aws.amazon.com/s3/[AWS] - https://cloud.google.com/storage/[GCP] - https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/storage/blobs/[Azure]

== Step 1. Start the Hazelcast Cluster

> === Create License Secret

Reviewer: Throughout this tutorial, we can remove the third-level headings and turn them into numbered steps.

----

The field `EXTERNAL-IP` is the address of your Hazelcast cluster.

=== Check Map Size

Configure the Hazelcast client to connect to the cluster external address as you did in <<Configure-Client, Configure the Hazelcast Client>>.

Now you can start the application to check the map size and see if the restore is successful.

[tabs]
====

Java::
+
--
[source, bash]
----
cd java
mvn package
java -jar target/*jar-with-dependencies*.jar size
----
--

NodeJS::
+
--
[source, bash]
----
cd nodejs
npm install
npm start size
----
--

Go::
+
--
[source, bash]
----
cd go
go run main.go size
----
--

Python::
+
--
[source, bash]
----
cd python
pip install -r requirements.txt
python main.py size
----
--

====

You should see the following output.

[source, shell]
----
Successful connection!
Current map size: 12
----

== Clean Up

To clean up the created resources remove the all Custom Resources and PVCs.

[source, shell]
----
kubectl delete secret <secret-name>
kubectl delete secret hazelcast-license-key
kubectl delete $(kubectl get hazelcast,hotbackup,map -o name)
kubectl delete pvc -l "app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=hazelcast-platform-operator"
----

== See Also

> - xref:operator:ROOT:index.adoc[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- xref:operator:ROOT:backup-restore.adoc[]
```

:page-layout: tutorial
:page-product: operator
:page-categories: Cloud Native
:page-lang: go, java, node, python
:page-enterprise: true
:page-est-time: 20 mins
:description: Learn how to back up data in Hazelcast maps to cloud storage and restore a cluster from that backup data.

{description}

== Context
In this tutorial, you'll do the following:

- Deploy Hazelcast with persistence enabled.

- Create a Hazelcast map that has persistence enabled.

- Back up all map entries to external storage in the cloud.

- Restart the Hazelcast cluster and restore the backup map entries from the cloud.

== Before you Begin

Before starting this tutorial, make sure that you meet the following prerequisites:

* Up and running https://kubernetes.io/[Kubernetes] cluster
* Kubernetes command-line tool, https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl[kubectl]
* Deployed xref:operator:ROOT:index.adoc[Hazelcast Platform Operator]
* Created blob storage and access credentials in one of the cloud providers: https://aws.amazon.com/s3/[AWS] - https://cloud.google.com/storage/[GCP] - https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/storage/blobs/[Azure]

== Step 1. Start the Hazelcast Cluster

> . Create License Secret

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a license secret
```

+

> Hazelcast Hot Backup is an enterprise feature, so you need to create a secret with Hazelcast Enterprise License (if you don't have one, get a trial license key from this https://hazelcast.com/get-started/#deploymenttype-imdg[link]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a secret with your link:http://trialrequest.hazelcast.com/[Hazelcast Enterprise License].
```
